**Individu, Individuel(le), Individual(e), Individu-a-l, Individu-a-lité**

Starting with [[François Laruelle]]’s self-published issues of _[[Pourquoi pas la philosophie|Pourquoi pas la philosophie ?]]_ (6 issues, 1983-85) and his subsequent monograph _[[Une biographie de l’homme ordinaire. Des Autorités et des Minorités.]]_ (Paris: Aubier, 1985; trans. _[[Une biographie de l’homme ordinaire. Des Autorités et des Minorités.|A Biography of Ordinary Man: On Authorities and Minorities]]_, by [[Jessie Hock]] & [[Alex Dubilet]], Medford: Polity Press, 2018), he employs the term _individual_ (FR) alongside “finite” and “minoritarian” with respect to the specific causality of the One or Ordinary Man. What complicates things is that _individual_ (also written _individu-a-l_ to draw attention to the ‘a’) is a neologism in French, _individu_ and _individuel(le)_ corresponding to the noun “individual” and the adjective “individual” respectively. Furthermore, [[François Laruelle|Laruelle]] plays with the “duel” in _indivi**duel**_ in reference to philosophical conflictuality, war, battle, the unity of contraries or opposites, or the unitary paradigm in general as well as the “dual” in _indivi**dual**_ referring to the irreversible precedence of the Real, the (non-philosophical and not metaphysical or arithmetic) One, or Ordinary Man to the World/Philosophy, or the minoritarian paradigm in general. We will not go into more detail than is necessary here. The first half of _individual_, the _indivi-_, also carries the weight of the distinction, evoking the French _indivis_ (EN: undivided) Ordinary Man is “both” undivided and dual insofar as it is separated-without-separation from the World or Philosophy that, in its fullest transcendental gesture, presents as a Divided Unity or Differentiated Same, the unity-of-contraries. It is this sense of the undivided that will later also be evoked when [[François Laruelle|Laruelle]] repurposes _individu_.

[[Rocco Gangle]]’s translation of [[François Laruelle|Laruelle]]’s _[[Philosophies de la différence. Introduction critique]]_ (1986), _[[Philosophies de la différence. Introduction critique|Philosophies of Difference: A Critical Introduction to Non-philosophy]]_ (2010) is not only one of the first of [[François Laruelle|Laruelle]]’s monographs to be translated into and published in English but is also the first translated published monograph to appear in English in which _individual_ is translated. He mentions the _-duel_/_-dual_ distinction in his translator’s introduction and, for the most part, renders _individual_ as “individual” except for the one time that _individuale_ (the grammatically feminine version of individual) is present, where he renders it as “individuale”.

The next Philosophy II monograph of [[François Laruelle|Laruelle]]’s to be published in English is [[Taylor Adkins|Taylor]]’s translation of _[[Philosophie et non-philosophie]]_ (1989), _Philosophy and Non-Philosophy_ (2013, Minneapolis: Univocal). He tries something a little less idiomatic but perhaps more necessarily clear in a context where other translated resources are still sparsely available and misinterpretations can quickly add up. He renders _individu_ and _individuel_ as “individual” as one often does but chooses to render _individual_ as “undivided-dual”. He appends the following translator’s note to page 40 where the specific rendering first appears:

>[!quote] 
>**4** “L’individu” is a noun that is equivalent with “the individual” (as noun) in English. “L’individuel” is functioning as a substantive noun here as well, but the word “individuel” in French is the adjectival form which also corresponds with the English word “individual” as an adjective. The word “individual” in French is a neologism of Laruelle's, and it has been translated here as “undivided-dual” in order to emphasize the meaning of “indivis” (undivided) and that of the “dual,” which will be elaborated later on in this work. [TN]

[[Jessie Hock]] & [[Alex Dubilet]]’s _[[Une biographie de l’homme ordinaire. Des Autorités et des Minorités.|A Biography of Ordinary Man]]_ (2018) faces a few challenges since the monograph it’s a translation of is the first of [[François Laruelle|Laruelle]]’s non-philosophical monographs[^1] but could only end up being published in 2018 much after translations of several later works were already out. For one, _individu_ is used here both in the sense of the noun “individual” as well as “undivided”. The translation renders _indivis(e)_ as “undivided” but all instances of _individu_ are rendered as “individual”. It is only in 1995’s _[[Théorie des Etrangers|Théorie des Étrangers. Science des hommes, démocratie, non-psychanalyse]]_, inaugurating Philosophy III (1995-2000), that we find a rigorous and fully intelligible distinction between the _individu_ as the undivided and _individu_ as the individual, i.e., one of the several philosophical (and therefore specular) images of Man. We will come back to this distinction. _A Biography of Ordinary Man_ occupying the special place that it does in the oeuvre, Laruelle is also compelled to draw attention to and point out his neologism which has him write it out as _individu-a-l_[^2].

Now is where we have to discuss a few works which we’ve mentioned before and that have only been partially translated mostly by [[Jeremy R. Smith|Jeremy]] (almost all the available translations are his, they’re all available online at [https://endemictheory.wordpress.com/translations/](https://endemictheory.wordpress.com/translations/)) and yours truly (I did a small section, [[The Body (of) the Stranger as Subjective Body in-last-instance and Organon of the Ego|The Body (of) the Stranger]]): the 6 issues of _[[Pourquoi pas la philosophie|Pourquoi pas la philosophie ?]]_ (henceforth _[[Pourquoi pas la philosophie|Pplp?]],_ following the French conventions for title-case and acronyms) and the monograph _[[Théorie des Etrangers|Théorie des Étrangers]]_ (_TdE_). [[Théorie des Etrangers|TdE]] is clear and explicit in its (unilateral) distinction between the individual as one of the several anthropoids[^3] or specular images of Man and the Stranger as the real object of a rigorous theory of humans or “men”[^4], that which we all are before the World, and the organon (or that by/through which, being passive through and through, Man acts) of Man as real individual/undivided (see [Jeremy’s translation of pp. 105-10](https://endemictheory.wordpress.com/2021/01/10/translation-of-francois-laruelle-non-humanism-and-the-critique-of-humanist-imagery/)) in the effectuation of the real critique of humanism qua non-humanism (this in no way implies that this is the superlative or only veritable philosophical critique of humanism in the broader and more precise sense in which non-philosophy employs “philosophical” but that it is a real critique insofar as non-philosophy distinguishes between real critique and philosophical critique). The issues of _[[Pourquoi pas la philosophie|Pplp?]]_ however are not always as explicit in making that distinction but the places in which it is made can be retroactively identified as [[Jeremy R. Smith|Jeremy]] does in the few translations of sections that he has put up. Eventually, the latter usage of _individu_ is abandoned altogether in [[François Laruelle|Laruelle]]’s later works and it rather refers specifically to the individual as an appearance arising out of the confounding of the order of Man (or the Real) and its subject or organon[^5].

One would hope that the non-elision not only of the distinct words but of the distinct senses or meanings of the same word as employed will provide the richest or most rigorous possible engagement with the texts in which they’re deployed as well as the thought that the texts express.


[^1]: It is not quite the first, however 1981’s untranslated _[[Le Principe de minorité]]_ is acknowledged in _[[Une biographie de l’homme ordinaire. Des Autorités et des Minorités.|Biography]]]_ as the break between [[François Laruelle|Laruelle]]]’s Philosophy I (1971-78) and Philosophy II (1981-92) periods but one that is still transitional and mixed.

[^2]: He never repeats this with respect to _individu**a**l_ but he does lean on the practice one more time 24 years later in _[[Tétralogos, un opéra de philosophies]]_ (2019) for his portmanteau of _Réminiscence_ and _Science_, _Réminisc-i-ence_.

[^3]: Along with “the creature, […], the subject, the demon, the reflexive or thinking being, consciousness-of, the mind or spirit, being-in-the-World and _Dasein_, the under-man and over-man, the unconscious, the barbarian and the savage, the political / religious / language-based / metaphysical animal, etc.”, [[Théorie des Etrangers|TdE]], p. 104.

[^4]: Plural of the general neutral term Man as employed in its non-philosophical usage and not its humanist (and, more generally, philosophical) usages as rather than sexed and/or gendered sense of Man.

[^5]: These are further distinguished in _[[Principes de la non-philosophie]]_ (1996; trans. _Principles of Non-Philosophy_, by [[Nicola Rubczak]] and [[Anthony Paul Smith]], 2013) where the clone is the pure-transcendental organon of Man (as real rather than transcendental) and the Stranger is its apriorico-transcendental structure.